JUDY WOODRUFF: More than 100,000
people turned
out for the Consumer Electronics
Show in Las
Vegas this week, the annual
showcase for the
latest in technology, devices
and high-end
toys.
One of the big themes was the
rising interest
in health tech.
Our science correspondent, Miles
O'Brien,
was there to explore the
potential benefits
and caveats around all of this.
His report is part of our
Breakthroughs series
on invention and innovation.
MILES O'BRIEN: Wearing your
heart on your
sleeve is taking on a whole new
meaning.
At the 2016 pilgrimage to Las
Vegas for gadget
geeks, CES, wearable health
tracking devices
broke into full stride, winning
much more
than a bit of flashy floor space
and heated
hype. Of course, for the growing
legions of
you keeping score at home on
your devices,
this is likely old data.
WOODY SCAL, Chief Business
Officer, Fitbit:
What is happening is, people are
taking more
responsibility for their health
and fitness.
They're realizing that health
and fitness
isn't just popping a pill. It's
actually what
they do that can really add up
to a healthy
life.
MILES O'BRIEN: Woody Scal is the
chief business
officer at market leader Fitbit,
a $4 billion
company based in San Francisco
that began
selling glorified pedometers in
2007.
WOODY SCAL: Seven years ago,
when you talked
about fitness electronics,
people thought
about products for triathletes.
They didn't
realize that these products
could really address
the needs of everyday people.
MILES O'BRIEN: An estimated 500
million people
worldwide apparently now feel
the need to
copiously log their steps,
leaps, strokes
and spins, while recording their
breathing,
heart rate, blood pressure,
sleep patterns
and food intake, just to name a
few, and then,
of course, brag about it online.
LINDSEY TURRENTINE, Editor in
Chief, CNET:
I think humans have always been
completely
narcissistic. That has not
changed. The technology
has given us a constant virtual
mirror.
MILES O'BRIEN: Lindsey
Turrentine is a sporadic
fitness logger and the editor in
chief of
CNET.com, where tracking the
technology of
fitness tracking has become a
big, important
beat.
LINDSEY TURRENTINE: We're always
checking
on ourselves constantly. We're
checking on
whether people have responded to
us, and then
we're also checking to see
whether our bodies
have responded to what we're
doing. It's just
another way to look at
ourselves.
MILES O'BRIEN: But there is more
than the
psychology of self-obsession
driving this
sector to grow more than 200
percent a year.
There's a perfect storm of
technological advances
as well. Sensors are rapidly
shrinking in
size and cost. Communications
between devices
has improved. And so has battery
life.
And, of course, none of it could
happen without
the ubiquity of smartphones, our
mobile switchboard
for all things technological.
It's a ripe
convergence for the big players
upstairs and
the upstarts in the basement as
well.
That's where we found Peter
Neilson, CEO of
a Denver start-up called
femtoScale.
It seems like there's no limit
to the amount
of data people want to get.
Right? Would you
agree with that? What's going
on?
PETER NEILSON, CEO, femtoScale:
And wearables...
MILES O'BRIEN: Yes.
PETER NEILSON: ... are blowing
up. That's
half of CES this year looks like
its wearable,
trying to compute everything.
MILES O'BRIEN: Neilson's company
is developing
a portable and eventually
wearable sensor
that can provide real-time
readings of air
quality by weighing airborne
particles much
too small to see. The scale is
just barely
visible.
I needed a jeweler's magnifying
glass to see
it.
PETER NEILSON: What we're really
trying to
do is look at, not just health
care, but wellness.
Can we use all this data we can
get from all
sorts of different things, not
only to keep
people healthy once they're in
the hospital,
but prevent them from getting
sick in the
first place?
MILES O'BRIEN: San Jose-based
Stratio has
shrunk a spectrometer down to
palm size. The
device shines a bright light on
food and medicine
to determine if they are what
they purport
to be.
In this demonstration, CEO Jae
Hyung Lee compared
counterfeit, generic and genuine
Viagra to
the fingerprint-like
spectroscopic pattern
of the real McCoy. It was
instantly obvious
which were the impostors.
JAE HYUNG LEE, CEO, Stratio: So
far, people
were just interested themselves,
but now they
want to know more about what
they're eating.
They want to know what they're
buying. They
want to know what's going on
around them.
MILES O'BRIEN: Clearly, exercise
and nutrition
tracking alone are not enough to
satisfy entrepreneurs
or consumers in the health
tracking space.
Kaustubh Kale is CEO of a Boca
Raton start-up
called AventuSoft. They are
developing a wearable
heart monitor and
electrocardiogram.
KAUSTUBH KALE, CEO, AventuSoft:
There's not
a pushback anymore. People are
already aware
of Fitbit or any of the other
wearables, so
they're already accepting these
new technologies.
And now, as the technology
improves, you can
now push it into the medical
grid domain.
MILES O'BRIEN: It's an
interesting development.
When you think about it, it
really is no less
than the democratization of
medicine, isn't
it?
KAUSTUBH KALE: Absolutely, yes.
You're putting
the power in the consumer's
hands, and so
they can get the data whenever
they need,
where they need it and with the
accuracy that
the doctor needs.
MILES O'BRIEN: This is where the
government
steps in. In early 2015, the
Food and Drug
Administration released a
document offering
guidance to industry and its own
staff on
regulating mobile medical
applications, declaring
it will only regulate apps that
are medical
devices and whose functionality
could pose
a risk to a patient's safety if
the mobile
app were to not function as
intended.
BAKUL PATEL, Food and Drug
Administration:
So, the risk to patients ranges
from misdiagnosis,
delay in diagnosis, or when you
get into the
discussion of false positives
and false negatives,
and then you have therapeutic
devices that
can actually harm people.
MILES O'BRIEN: Bakul Patel is
associate center
director for digital health at
FDA.
BAKUL PATEL: There are standards
of what an
EKG machine -- how it should
capture, what
kind of wave forms, how it
should be managing
the signals that comes out of
your body and
displaying it. Those are all
standards written
-- written for that.
If you're going to be in the
market as an
EKG machine, doctors better rely
on them,
and we ask for testing to
happen, so they
can actually make the same sort
of diagnosis
and treatment decisions.
MILES O'BRIEN: The pull of
diagnostic tools
out of the doctor's toolbox and
into our pockets,
our ears and onto our wrists is
a revolution
seed in part by this man, Larry
Smarr.
A scientist and professor at the
University
of California, San Diego, he
used the video
wall at the school's Qualcomm
Institute to
illustrate the power of what's
called the
quantified self.
LARRY SMARR, University of
California, San
Diego: Big data, as it's called.
And this
is about me. Every one of the
points on these
graphs are a different blood
test or a stool
test in which I got a data point
over a decade.
MILES O'BRIEN: Dr. Smarr began
his fantastic
data voyage back in 2000 with a
desire to
lose some weight. And so his
self-prescribed
testing began. He never looked
back, and,
before long, he spotted trouble.
His self-diagnosis,
Crohn's disease.
So, he brought the data to his
doctor, who
said:
LARRY SMARR: If you don't have
symptoms, why
are you here? I said, because I
got data.
And he said, well, that's not
helpful. And
so I realized, as a lifetime
scientist, that
the practice of medicine and the
practice
of science, while they overlap
sometimes,
are generally different.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, he fired that
doctor and
found another. Indeed, so many
people generating
so much diagnostic data may
sound like a prescription
for a lot of bad diagnoses,
unneeded anxiety
or even an epidemic of
hypochondria.
LINDSEY TURRENTINE: There is
such a thing
as too much data if you can't
deal with the
data.
If you don't have software that
will help
you interpret the data in a
smart and reliable
way, or if you get overwhelmed
and frustrated
and you don't know how to pick
it out of the
big needle in a haystack sort of
data pile
that's building up on your
phone, then it's
too much data. But it's sort of
up to you
and how much you can handle.
MILES O'BRIEN: But a giant cloud
of real-time
data, really big data,
aggregated, analyzed
and compared with artificial
intelligence,
could lead to stunning
breakthroughs in preventive
medicine.
WOODY SCAL: Where you can figure
out, how
has this kind of signal been
correlated with
other things that have happened
among a
broader set of people. Someday,
could you
get an early alert about an
impending heart
event? Yes, I believe you can. I
believe you
will.
MILES O'BRIEN: There may be
rough spots and
silliness along the way, but
there is no stopping
the free market experiment to
give us all
more knowledge and more power
managing our
own well-being.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Las Vegas.